



Quantum Internet Research Group                                 D. Lopez
Internet-Draft                                                Telefonica
Intended status: Informational                                 V. Martin
Expires: 23 August 2026                                              UPM
                                                                B. Lopez
                                                          IMDEA Networks
                                                         L. M. Contreras
                                                              Telefonica
                                                        19 February 2026


      A Multiplane Architecture Proposal for the Quantum Internet
               draft-lopez-qirg-qi-multiplane-arch-latest

Abstract

   A consistent reference architecture model for the Quantum Internet is
   required to progress in its evolution, providing a framework for the
   integration of the protocols applicable to it, and enabling the
   advance of the applications based on it.  This model has to satisfy
   three essential requirements: agility, so it is able to adapt to the
   evolution of quantum communications base technologies,
   sustainability, with open availability in technological and
   economical terms, and pliability, being able to integrate with the
   operations and management procedures in current networks.  This
   document proposes such an architecture framework, with the goal of
   providing a conceptual common framework for the integration of
   technologies intended to build the Quantum Internet infrastructure
   and its integration with the current Internet.  The framework is
   based on the already extensive experience in the deployment of QKD
   network infrastructures and on related initiatives focused on the
   integration of network infrastructures and services.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://dr2lopez.github.io/qi-multiplane-arch/draft-lopez-qirg-qi-
   multiplane-arch.html.  Status information for this document may be
   found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-lopez-qirg-qi-
   multiplane-arch/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Quantum Internet
   Research Group Research Group mailing list (mailto:qirg@irtf.org),
   which is archived at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/qirg/.
   Subscribe at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/qirg/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/dr2lopez/qi-multiplane-arch.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 23 August 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Base Technologies: QKD Experience and Evolved SDN Concepts
     3.1.  A QKD Multi-Plane Architecture
       3.1.1.  The Service Unit Concept in QKD Networks
     3.2.  Interfacing with Classical Networks
     3.3.  Applying Network Virtualization Principles
     3.4.  CLAS and Quantum Networks
   4.  A Framework Architecture for the Quantum Internet
     4.1.  Strata for Quantum Networks
     4.2.  Identification of Interfaces and Protocols
       4.2.1.  The Role of Service Units
       4.2.2.  The Role of Synthetic Environments
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  References
     6.1.  Normative References
     6.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   As another case of the "classical vs quantum" apparent
   contradictions, the nature of quantum communications [QTTI21],
   associated with natural physical effects that require a specific
   infrastructure to be used for communications, poses a significant
   challenge in the definition of any network reference architecture to
   be used for such communications.  Nevertheless, the growing interest
   on quantum networking, its applications, and the eventual
   availability of a Quantum Internet, require of consensus on an
   architecture framework able to support the definition and evolution
   of different protocols and interfaces.

   Several steps have been taken in this direction, including the
   identification of architectural principles and base technologies made
   in {RFC9340}}, the description of relevant use cases [RFC9583], and
   specific approaches to layered models for Quantum Networking,
   summarized and discussed in [QIPS22].  While the principles provide
   an extremely valuable common ground for further collaboration among
   quantum and network practitioners, they are not intended to provide
   the solid framework required for progressing in the definition of
   specific protocols and other interfaces for common network management
   tasks and interactions with user applications.  On the other hand,
   the proposals made for a layered approach provide interesting
   insights on requirements and potential mechanisms to structure
   quantum communications, but, first, they do not include essential
   aspects for a network at scale and, second and most important, they
   do not take into account the need for direct interactions beyond the
   layered structure, such as those between classical and quantum
   networking services, between applications and the quantum network,
   etc.

   In parallel, the operational experience with the first kind of
   infrastructures using quantum communication technologies to provide
   an actual network service, those focused on Quantum Key Distribution
   (QKD), has allowed practitioners to explore the solution space and
   identify design patterns that seem applicable to the general case of
   a Quantum Internet.  A corpus of architectural proposals [Y3802],
   experimental deployments [MADQCI23] and pilot infrastructures
   [EUROQCI] have become available in the recent years, and can be used
   to derive useful conclusions, especially if combined with recent
   proposals in network architecture [RFC8597], intended to address the
   complexity of management and integration at scale beyond the basic
   layered constructs supporting connectivity.

   This document proposes a multi-plane reference architecture for the
   Quantum Internet, derived from available proposals and the
   operational experience with QKD infrastructure.  The proposal
   attempts to define a framework with three essential properties to
   guarantee a seamless evolution of the technology, and the
   consolidation of applications and management practices:

   *  Agility: Provide abstractions able to incorporate new protocols
      and interfaces as the technology evolves, avoiding a tight
      coupling with specific physical technologies.

   *  Sustainability: Considering it at all levels and in full scale,
      especially regarding environmental and social impacts, including
      open availability in technological and economical terms, and
      fostering infrastructure reuse.

   *  Pliability: Facilitate the seamless integration of classical and
      quantum network operational procedures, applying and adapting best
      practices in use by the Internet community.

   And trying to address three essential characteristics already
   identified in [PSQN22]:

   *  Universality, so a quantum network can accommodate any
      application.

   *  Transparency, so quantum networks can share physical media with
      classical networks.

   *  Scalability, so quantum networking protocols can support the
      growth of the network.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Base Technologies: QKD Experience and Evolved SDN Concepts

   The design and deployment of QKD infrastructures has followed a
   number of design principles, based on the best practices in network
   architecture and management established during the lifetime of the
   Internet (and even before), and focused on the separation of
   concerns, that have been converging on the trends around open
   disaggregation strategies, and the identification of separate data
   and control planes, connected by means of open interfaces.

   In what relates to the evolution of SDN concepts, the Cooperating
   Layered Architecture for Software-Defined Networking (CLAS) [RFC8597]
   described a SDN architecture structured in two different strata,
   namely Service Stratum and Transport Stratum.  On one hand, the
   Service Stratum contains the functions related to the provision of
   services and the capabilities offered to external applications.  On
   the other hand, the Transport Stratum comprises the functions focused
   on the transfer of data between the communication endpoints, e.g.,
   between end-user devices, between two service gateways, etc.

3.1.  A QKD Multi-Plane Architecture

   Applying the SDN and disaggregation principles, QKD infrastructures
   have been essentially structured around three different planes
   [QTTI21].  While we are not talking about a rigid, layered structure,
   where a given layer can only provide services to the immediate upper
   layer and consume services from the immediate lower layer, it is
   worth noting that interactions among elements in the different planes
   must use well-defined interfaces [ETSI04] [ETSI14] [ETSI15] [ETSI18],
   and these interactions may incorporate a layered approach.

   In this approach, the Quantum Forwarding Plane (QFP) is in charge of
   performing the operations (quantum and classical) to ensure the
   forwarding of the quantum signals or enable the utilization of
   persistent quantum resources, like persistent, distributed
   entanglement.  In QKD, the QFP encapsulates all the functionality
   required to obtain an end-to-end secret key across the network.  This
   implies the transmission of the quantum signals and the execution of
   any associated protocols.  Note this would require the use of
   classical procedures, either via a separated physical "classical
   channel" [QTTI21] or the reuse of a common channel, as proposed in
   "packet-oriented" approaches [PSQN22].  In this sense, the forwarding
   of the keys at intermediate nodes in the multi-hop chains used to
   overcome current limitations in propagation of quantum signals or
   states, has to be considered part of the QFP, since it is done
   exclusively on behalf of the QKD functionality.

   On its side, the Service Overlay Plane (SOP) supports the use of the
   keys derived from the QFP by applications.  This includes the
   storage, identification, delivery, and lifecycle management of the
   units of consumption (keys of different length, delivered according
   to specific patterns) at the endpoints of the network.  All network
   functionalities at this plane can be considered application-oriented,
   with a clear mapping to an overlay data plane in a classical network,
   though the SOP elements should be aware of the nature and specific
   needs of the QFP they interact with.  Key management mechanisms,
   beyond key forwarding by intermediate nodes, fit within the SOP.
   This comprises methods such as hybridization and augmentation
   techniques, or the means for synchronizing key identifiers across API
   boundaries.

   Finally, the Control and Management Plane (CMP) is made of the
   elements that create and supervise the state of the network.  This
   decoupling between network configuration and (general) data
   forwarding is supported by the controller, a mediation logically
   centralized element between the control capabilities supported by the
   elements in the QFP and SOP and the management and control functions.
   These management and control applications rely on the controller,
   taking advantage of the centralization it provides, to guarantee the
   best performance of the network and avoid diverging local control
   decisions that might lead to sub-optimal configurations.

   It is worth noting this management centralization does not contradict
   the distributed principles generally applied in current networks.
   Local control decisions are intended to be coordinated by centralized
   management.  While the communication between the controller and the
   controlled elements relies on some kind of SDN protocol, the
   controller exposes a consistent abstract model of the network devices
   and topology, that can be structured in a hierarchy of abstractions,
   from lower-level, element-focused ones, up to application-oriented
   ones.

   In summary, QKD infrastructures are converging into an extended SDN
   model, with two differentiated data planes, controlled in a
   coordinated manner through a common Control and Management Plane,
   that supports aggregated mechanisms for further orchestration.  The
   QFP/SOP duality constitutes a common abstract foundation for a
   general approach to quantum communications networks, regardless of
   their final purpose.

3.1.1.  The Service Unit Concept in QKD Networks

   QKD infrastructures are evolving from a conglomerate of links, where
   keys derived from the protocol applied to a link are used to secure
   the communication between two entities directly associated to the
   endpoints of the link, into real networks, able to forward a key to
   be used between any two entities attached to the network.  As
   discussed above, the entities in the SOP play a key role for this,
   supporting the storage, delivery and lifecycle management of the
   service units being consumed by the applications attached to the
   network.  These SOP entities, are commonly referred as KME (Key
   Management Entity), acting as key storage for a specific element or
   elements in the QFP, and providing an endpoint for applications to
   request and consume keys for a specific secure interaction.  The
   interfaces KMEs use to interact with the QFP elements are usually
   provided by specific (commonly software-based) components, acting as
   agents in the QFP, and therefore termed Key Management Agent (KMA).

   Several of these KMEs can be logically grouped into what is called a
   KMS (Key Management System), supporting a set of related applications
   grouped into a trust domain, and therefore consistently operated by a
   corresponding entity in the CMP.  The differentiation between KME and
   KMS functionalities becomes more apparent as networks expand and
   consolidate, with many cases of current QKD link-oriented
   infrastructures referring to a KMS as the entity integrating both
   roles.

   The service units provided by a QKD network have to be uniquely
   identified within the network, so they can be properly managed by the
   SOP, including their routing across the different required KMEs, the
   requests of appropriate links in the QFP, and the management of the
   lifecycle events related to making the key available to the
   applications willing to use it.  It is important to note we are
   talking about a service unit, and not a data unit associated with a
   particular protocol, and therefore what is relevant here are the
   identification of the two application endpoints (that should include
   a nonce mechanism to identify the specific pairing) together with
   relevant parameters regarding the key lifecycle, such as its length
   and valid time-to-live.  While these are the two essential lifecycle
   parameters, others, as it might be the case of applicable crypto
   algorithms, could be considered as well.  The service unit identifier
   is not directional, i.e., it has no source or destination addresses,
   as it defines a shared state to be used by two applications.  We can
   consider the analogy of transport flows in the current Internet,
   rather than packets.

   The current proposal we are experimenting with advocate for using
   URNs [RFC8141] as endpoint identifiers, taking advantage of their
   nature of location-independent, persistent resource identifiers.  The
   q-component of the endpoint URN can be used to carry the nonce part
   of the specific application identifier.  If we consider that
   lifecycle parameters can be expressed using a specific URN in its
   q-component, we have that a service unit identifier consists of the
   combination of three URNs.

   As an example, let’s consider URNs for application endpoints use the
   qkd namespace id, and that lifecycle parameters use the URN
   qkd:lifecycle assigned name, with the parameters size and valid-
   until.  A service unit identifier for QKD between two domains, with
   roots madqci and quditto, would look like:

   urn:qkd:madqci:ccips?=nonce=177923
   urn:qkd:quditto:emulator:ipsec:controller?=nid=af33017
   urn:qkd:lifecycle?=size=256&valid-until=1750708945

   The structure and delegation mechanisms provided by URNs allow for
   arbitrary aggregation of prefixes, enabling any kind of routing
   style, from the aggregation and inter-domain announcement similar (or
   compatible) to BGP in classical Internet to the decision on which
   prefixes are announced and how they are routed by means of SDN
   controllers, whether by means of a federation approach or in a
   hierarchical control structure.  The approach also supports the use
   of non-routable identifiers that cannot be announced outside a given
   domain or KMS and can only establish service pairing with other
   applications within the same domain.  These mechanisms would be
   applied by the corresponding elements in the CMP.

   The QKD service unit identifies a shared state between two
   application entities, and therefore cannot be consider directional,
   and the concepts of source and destination do not apply here.
   Nevertheless, directionality is relevant in the process of
   establishing the QKD service unit, both in terms of its identifier
   and of its contents.  In the case of the identifier, one of the
   application entities will request a service unit to the relevant KMS/
   KME it is attached to, identifying itself and the other peer in the
   service unit, together with the applicable lifecycle parameters.
   Relying on the available route information and the replies of the
   intermediate elements in the SOP, the final identifier of the QKD
   service unit will be built.  The associated content, i.e., the bit
   string defining the key to be shared between the two application
   endpoints, will be derived from the elements in the participating
   links in the QFP and the application of any additional mechanisms
   (key encryption, augmentation, trusted node forwarding…) required by
   the participating KMEs and the corresponding links.

3.2.  Interfacing with Classical Networks

   The interface of QKD infrastructures with classical networks
   (commonly identified as OTN, Optical Transport Networks) has been
   based on three basic principles, related to the ones we mentioned
   above: facilitate the reuse of physical infrastructure
   (sustainability and transparency), apply the abstractions commonly
   used in open and disaggregated networks (agility and universality),
   and reuse the best practices in network management being applied in
   current infrastructures (pliability and scalability).  We can
   classify the interface mechanisms according to the level at which
   they occur.

   At the application level, end-to-end key management and end-to-end
   key creation are obviously the main target.  Since many applications
   of these keys are related to classical communications (direct
   encryption, key derivation for symmetric algorithms, peer identity…)
   there is a clear interface for the SOP, with classical network
   functions acting as consumers of the keys or, in general terms, the
   bit streams generated by the QFP.  Further on, the application of NFV
   mechanisms to any network function allows for its implementation
   through software virtualization techniques (virtual machines, para-
   virtualization containers, unikernels, etc.), irrespectively of their
   application environments or specific plane.  The lifecycle management
   of all network functions, of any nature, under a common MANO stack
   [NFV06], seems the most reasonable option.

   At the control and management level, the distinct nature of network
   elements and the mediation nature of the controller role do not make
   advisable the use of common quantum/OTN controllers, but there are
   common abstractions able to support cross-interactions among
   controllers and management applications, especially regarding:

   *  Quantum management applications requiring operations on topologies
      and physical paths in the OTN mediated by an OTN controller.

   *  OTN management applications requiring operation on quantum
      topologies mediated by the quantum controller.

   *  Topology updates exchanged between quantum and OTN controllers.

   *  The coordination through an integrated controller (commonly
      referred as "orchestrator"), able to provide a common view to
      application network functions.

   At the forwarding level, there is a radical difference between the
   network elements in quantum networks and OTN, and therefore
   interactions in data forwarding are not feasible, with only two
   exceptions: the possibility of sharing physical media, and the use of
   classical channels to support QKD algorithms, as it is the case of
   distillation channels in protocols like BB84.  In this case, a proper
   control of the path and physical parameters has to be applied to
   minimize interferences of any nature and guarantee OTN connectivity
   for the quantum algorithms.

3.3.  Applying Network Virtualization Principles

   Recent proposals for QKD network management have explored the use of
   operational models that radically leverage the virtualization of
   control and key management functionalities [EVCK25].  These
   approaches pave the way for a tighter integration of quantum
   functionality with functions already established in state of the art
   classical networks, including support for user/function
   authentication and authorization, and support for user and function
   mobility, while adhering to established QKD network standards.
   Integrating these mechanisms enhance security measures and ensure
   that quantum networks can seamlessly interface with existing and
   future telecommunications infrastructure.

   While SDN ensures higher degrees of flexibility and reconfigurability
   by allowing network functions to be easily modified and upgraded
   through software changes, virtualization enables the abstraction of
   hardware devices by creating virtual instances, which improves
   scalability, resource efficiency and allows the dynamic allocation of
   softwarized network functions in different locations.  As quantum
   technology evolves, a virtualized layer for softwarized network
   functions significantly aids adaptation to these changes, ensuring
   pliability and responsiveness for seamless updates, and incorporating
   new mechanisms without extensive hardware modifications.

   As for key exchange, current technology does not allow direct end-to-
   end quantum key exchange between distant nodes.  Instead, key
   distribution must rely on trusted intermediary nodes to transmit keys
   hop-by-hop.  A key management layer where the actions of all nodes
   are coordinated is needed to ensure secure and efficient key
   distribution.  Virtualizing and decoupling key management from the
   physical QKD devices enhances flexibility and scalability, and
   supports the integration of hybrid cryptographic strategies,
   combining QKD and post-quantum algorithms to ensure security and
   performance.  Additionally, it allows real-time performance
   monitoring, data-driven control and management, and tailored access
   and admission mechanisms [QNSA24].

   The virtualized key management layer acts as an intermediary between
   the clients and the cryptographic material generating devices.  This
   layer would have as functions both those that fall within the
   framework of the SOP defined in previous sections, as well as key
   forwarding, specific to the QFP.  For the latter, each functional
   element of this layer, identified as key managers entities in
   [EVCK25], has a forwarding table, which can be dynamically updated
   whenever necessary by the control plane.  Additionally, they
   implement a token bucket for each application session, to control the
   request rate by limiting it to an agreed-upon value at the Quality of
   Service (QoS) level.

   The virtualized control plane can have different functional elements,
   and, as with the key management layer, several instances of the same
   element can be executed as necessary for the correct operation of the
   network.  Foundational elements include: a controller, an access
   control and an admission control component, a routing module, and a
   monitoring element.  This set allows the execution of network access
   policies, ensuring that no unauthorized user or process enters the
   network, verifies the configuration parameters of new sessions opened
   by applications, ensuring that they are granted the appropriate QoS,
   and performs performance tests on the physical links and collecting
   statistics on the QKD modules, quickly alerting about any failure or
   possible attack on the QFP.

3.4.  CLAS and Quantum Networks

   As discussed above, SDN principles have enabled the base abstractions
   for the conceptualization of QKD infrastructures, including the
   services they provide and the required interactions in the use of
   classical infrastructure to support the required connectivity
   patterns.  The original CLAS architecture, as defined by [RFC8597],
   addresses SDN evolution considering the forwarding (transport) and
   service aspects in two separated but coordinated planes.  This
   approach matches the multi-plane approach described for QKD
   infrastructures, though it seems somehow limited to address the
   required interactions with physical connectivity, as well as to
   incorporate general requirements regarding automation to support
   convergence with operational practices.

   The new extension of the CLAS architecture, as defined in
   [CLASEVO], intends to address the current evolution of networks and
   the services they support introducing new aspects, in particular the
   considerations of distributed computing capabilities attached to
   different points in the network, and the introduction of evidence-
   driven techniques, such as Analytics, Artificial Intelligence (AI)
   and Machine Learning (ML) to improve operations by means of closed-
   loop automation.

   The CLAS framework provides a sound foundation for incorporating the
   experience gained with QKD deployments in a general proposal
   applicable to the Quantum Internet, as it is essentially compatible
   with the architectural lessons learned within the QKD fields, and at
   the same time supports additional degrees of freedom regarding the
   integration of control mechanisms, and the interplay with the
   (shared) infrastructure and its management.

4.  A Framework Architecture for the Quantum Internet

   Based on the available experience on the deployment of existing QKD
   infrastructures and on the evolution of SDN-enabled architectures
   described in the previous section, this document proposes an
   architecture framework intended to offer a conceptual common
   framework for the integration of technologies intended to build the
   Quantum Internet infrastructure and its integration with the current
   Internet.

   Once we presented in the previous section the lessons learned from
   QKD deployments, introducing a general architecture applicable to
   those deployments, in this section we propose the generalization of
   such architecture towards a Quantum Internet, augmented by the
   extended SDN approach proposed by the evolved CLAS in [CLASEVO].  In
   what follows, we will discuss how this framework architecture would
   support the required properties: agility, allowing for technology
   evolution, sustainability, fostering infrastructure reuse, and
   pliability, supporting operational best practices.

   Furthermore, we propose here a general network architecture trying to
   incorporate relevant trends such as cloud nativeness, the integration
   of zero-touch management, or the considerations about intent.  With
   this in mind, in what follows a CLAS-based architecture frameworks
   for quantum communications networks is introduced, including the
   proposed strata and their main characteristics.

4.1.  Strata for Quantum Networks

   The CLAS architecture was initially conceived from the perspective of
   exploiting the advantages of network programmability in operational
   networks, complementing and going beyond the traditional layered
   structured of the original SDN proposal.  Following the CLAS
   philosophy, as proposed in its recent update [CLASEVO] of decoupling
   services, additional functionality, and base connectivity, the
   architecture of a quantum network should be composed of:

   *  A Service Stratum, dealing with the functionality related to the
      purpose of the quantum network, and aligned with SOP described for
      QKD networks above.  At this moment, the most general service,
      beyond QKD key management, is obviously entanglement distribution
      in a general quantum network.  Others can be considered, as time
      synchronization, identity assurance or sensing.  The service
      stratum would consider the relevant service units (keys, shared
      states, identities, timelines...), deal with their appropriate
      forwarding and routing, and deliver these service units as
      requested by the user application functions.  The concept of
      service unit becomes essential here, as the cornerstone for
      fundamental network characteristics (addressing, routing,
      information structuring...) and for the interface to the
      applications using the network.  As the discussion on how to
      identify and relate keys in a wide-area QKD network is still
      alive, the need to identify how to “pack” qubits in a way useful
      for, say, distributed computations or teleportation coding, how to
      route these packs, and how to request and consume services based
      on them is crucial to define how a global quantum network should
      be built and operated.

   *  A Quantum Forwarding Stratum, in charge of the direct application
      of quantum protocols and algorithms between the two endpoints of a
      quantum link, even when it is a multi-hop one, very much as the
      QFP we described as part of QKD deployments.  It is important to
      note that this stratum must be able to support the service units
      that constitute, but there is no need for a one-to-one mapping
      between those quantum forwarding units and the service units.  As
      example, let us consider entanglement forwarding via swapping,
      which would likely occur on a pairwise basis at this stratum, but
      needs to be considered in a collective view to make sense to the
      applications interacting with the service stratum.

   *  A Connectivity Stratum, taking care of providing the paths to
      support the quantum links used by the quantum forwarding and
      service strata.  Typically, the connectivity stratum would be
      supported by OTN infrastructure, via fiber and/or open-space
      links, and would follow a common connectivity paradigm,
      specifically a circuit-based or packet-based one.  While current
      quantum links deal with OTN infrastructure according to a circuit-
      based paradigm, recent proposals are addressing the idea of
      "quantum packets" [PSQN22] and the connectivity stratum would have
      to deal, in general terms, with the classical headers of such
      packets.  Furthermore, classical links are always required for
      supporting quantum links procedures, and by any kind of
      monitoring, control, and management connections.  The provisioning
      of related quantum and classical links, and their consistent
      operation to meet service levels will be the main concern of this
      stratum.

   This architecture, following the CLAS proposal itself, is built under
   the assumption that planes within and across strata communicate
   through well-defined, open interfaces supporting programmability, as
   a generalization of the common SDN architecture that defines a
   controller as a mediator between application and network (forwarding)
   devices.  It includes the archetypal case of a centralized controller
   but is not limited to that particular realization.  These broader
   implications of SDN principles are among the main motivation of the
   original CLAS proposal in [CLASEVO], and it is the main reason for
   using it as the base for the framework proposed by this document.
   The archetypal case of a centralized controller would be the most
   common deployment style, but the architecture is able to support more
   distributed approaches, in which each participating domain runs a
   specific instance of the different strata, providing collaboration by
   the exposure of tailored information to the other domains via border
   protocols, as proposed in [ALTOQ24].  Even configurations where a
   particular domain focuses on one or two of the strata, supporting the
   other strata being hosted in different domains is also conceivable.

   Based on the images used to illustrate the strata proposed in
   [CLASEVO] and [RFC8597], the relationship among the strata described
   above would be as shown in the following diagram:

                                       Application Functions
                                                 /\
                                                 ||
           +-------------------------------------||-------------+
           | Service Stratum                     ||             |
           |                                     \/             |
           |  +--------------+     ...........................  |
           |  | Telemetry Pl.|     . SDN Intelligence        .  |
           |  |              |<===>.                         .  |
           |  +-----/\-------+     .        +--------------+ .  |
           |        ||             .        |   Mgmt. Pl.  | .  |
           |        ||             .  +--------------+     | .  |
           |  +-----\/-------+     .  |  Control Pl. |-----+ .  |
           |  | Resource Pl. |     .  |              |       .  |
           |  |              |<===>.  +--------------+       .  |
           |  +--------------+     ...........................  |
           |                                /\             /\   |
           |                                ||             ||   |
           +--------------------------------||-------------||---+
                            Standard API -- || --          ||
           +--------------------------------||-----+       ||
           | Quantum Forwarding Stratum     ||     |       ||
           |                                \/     |       ||
           |  +----------+    ...................  |       ||
           |  | Telemetry|    . SDN             .  |  Std. ||
           |  | Plane    |<==>. Intelligence    .  |  API  ||
           |  +-----/\---+    .    +----------+ .  |    -- || --
           |        ||        .    | Mgmt. Pl.| .  |       ||
           |        ||        .  +----------+ | .  |       ||
           |  +-----\/---+    .  | Control  |-+ .  |       ||
           |  | Resource |    .  | Plane    |   .  |       ||
           |  | Plane    |<==>.  +----------+   .  |       ||
           |  +----------+    ...................  |       ||
           +----------------------------------/\---+       ||
                              Standard API -- || --        ||
                          +-------------------||-----------||-----+
                          | Connectivity      ||           ||     |
                          | Stratum           ||           ||     |
                          |                   \/           \/     |
                          |  +----------+    ...................  |
                          |  | Telemetry|    . SDN             .  |
                          |  | Plane    |<==>. Intelligence    .  |
                          |  +-----/\---+    .    +----------+ .  |
                          |        ||        .    | Mgmt. Pl.| .  |
                          |        ||        .  +----------+ | .  |
                          |  +-----\/---+    .  | Control  |-+ .  |
                          |  | Resource |    .  | Plane    |   .  |
                          |  | Plane    |<==>.  +----------+   .  |
                          |  +----------+    ...................  |
                          +---------------------------------------+

   Essentially, this architecture model incorporates the findings from
   QKD deployments and addresses the requirements for providing a
   general framework for quantum networks towards the Quantum Internet.
   It is intended to support the evolution of network base technologies,
   provide the degrees of freedom necessary to encompass different
   deployment models, and align with relevant trends in network
   operation, while considering the practical aspects related to
   classical connectivity.

   The proposed architecture will address the evolution of network base
   technologies by providing abstractions able to accommodate to this
   evolution.  Considering the stages analyzed in [QIROAD18], the QKD
   deployment patterns described in the previous section already cover
   "Trusted Repeater Networks" and "Prepare and Measure Networks", and
   the general architecture proposed here is able to accommodate the
   more evolved stages, namely "Entanglement Distribution Networks",
   "Quantum Memory Networks", "Few Qubit Fault-Tolerant Networks", and
   "Quantum Computing Networks".  As immediate examples we can consider
   the integration of features in the Connectivity Stratum with the
   other two strata to support entanglement forwarding among different
   locations, or the incorporation of future quantum repeaters into the
   Quantum Forwarding Stratum to support more elaborated behaviors of
   the Service Stratum.

   In addition, these network abstractions are intended to provide
   specific degrees of freedom for network design and deployment,
   through the incorporation of independent resource and control planes
   at each stratum.  Given the control mechanisms identified as "SDN
   intelligence" on the diagram above are able to expose open
   interfaces, the approach for coordinating the different strata via
   mechanisms like those defined in [ETSI18] is totally feasible, and
   different aggregation patterns (multi-stratum, multi-domain...) and
   models (federated, hierarchical...) can be applied.  These
   aggregation mechanisms are equally applicable in the case of
   telemetry data and their integration with closed-loop mechanisms for
   automation, in support of the required quantum network agility.

   The evolved CLAS proposal in [CLASEVO] explicitly incorporates
   current trends in network automation, in whatever the flavor
   including AI and intent expressions.  This architecture guarantees
   the future pliability of quantum networks, in alignment with the
   evolution of best practices in general network management.

   Finally, by explicitly addressing the issues related to the
   connectivity of quantum links, the architecture considers the
   interactions with any other relevant operational aspects required for
   providing quantum network services.  The direct integration of a
   stratum focused on these aspects makes the proposed architecture
   better aligned with the sustainability goal.

4.2.  Identification of Interfaces and Protocols

   The architecture proposed in this document is intended as a framework
   to evaluate and explore compatibility among the different proposals
   on protocols and interfaces for the future availability of quantum
   features in the global Internet, with the goal of providing a uniform
   reference model to choose and apply the most appropriate solutions to
   the Quantum Internet challenges.  While the reference architecture
   does not intend to identify a concrete set of these protocols and
   interfaces, it is useful to analyze current proposals and trends, and
   provide some guidance on how the framework can be useful for
   assessing the integration of the solutions applicable to the
   different elements that have to converge to realize the Quantum
   Internet.

   There is a significant corpus of standards and operational practica
   applicable for the Connectivity Stratum, sustained by a well
   established experience in the management and use of optical and, to
   some extent, satellite-based networks.  The differentiation of the
   planes considered in the CLAS architecture within the Connectivity
   Stratum has been common practice in the deployment and operation of
   IP converged services over optical networks.  The abstractions and
   topology views described in the ACTN framework defined in [RFC8453]
   constitute a solid foundation to describe the functionality of the
   planes within the Connectivity Stratum, and the interfaces to be used
   in the interactions with the other strata.  An element like the Path
   Computation Element (PCE) described in [RFC8637], able to address the
   considerations related to quantum connectivity and the implications
   of entanglement-based forwarding, could constitute the core of the
   intelligence and telemetry planes.  Specific forwarding elements,
   able to fulfill the conditions for quantum signals, including the
   potential co-propagation with classical signals, and to interface
   with future quantum repeaters [QREPS], would constitute the essential
   substrate of the resource plane.  The current trends in optical
   disaggregation and the use of orchestrated SDN mechanisms for network
   path management and monitoring provide a natural path for leveraging
   network virtualization mechanisms within the Connectivity Stratum,
   facilitating their integration.

   In what relates to the Quantum Forwarding Stratum, current best
   practices indicate that telemetry and SDN intelligence planes will
   follow the same directions as the other strata, with virtualized,
   likely cloud-native implementations for them.  Even in the case of
   the resource plane, one can expect the availability of specific
   software agent elements in charge of managing devices, interacting
   with the Connectivity Plane and providing support to the service
   units relevant for the Service Stratum.  A recent proposal [QUADDR],
   beyond the foundations described in [RFC9340], can be used to
   exemplify the main objective of the framework architecture described
   in this document.  The proposal presents quantum-native mechanisms
   for routing procedures, and the corresponding addressing conventions
   supporting them, and considers network-wide mechanisms, structured in
   two tiers defining what could be assimilated to a local domain and an
   internetworking domain.  This proposal can be naturally integrated in
   the Quantum Forwarding Stratum (QFS), and its SDN-inspired
   architecture would map the proposed Entanglement-Defined Controller
   (EDC) at the kernel of the SDN intelligence plane.  The integration
   of an architecture like this within the framework described in this
   document would require to analyze the mapping between the node
   identifiers described in the paper and the service units discussed
   below.  The choices for the coordination among the different strata
   if the QFS uses an architecture like the one proposed in the
   references paper would need to be also analyzed: on the one hand, the
   interface between the EDC and Service Stratum should be defined, and
   the QFS elements should need to be extended to include its
   interactions with the Connectivity Stratum, or consider it oblivious
   to physical connectivity and leave the coordination to the Service
   Stratum.  This is the kind of evaluations the synthetic environments
   discussed in Section 4.2.2 will be extremely useful.

   The discussion on the foundations of the Service Stratum (SS) is made
   on the following section, where the concept of service units, as
   already introduced for the case of QKD networks, is analyzed.
   Furthermore, As a natural consequence of what is discussed above in
   the framework of cloud-native QKD, the use of network virtualization
   techniques would be essential for the Service Stratum, at all of
   their planes:

   *  The SDN intelligence plane, allowing the dynamic management of
      service units and their association with the corresponding units
      in the Quantum Forwarding Stratum.

   *  The telemetry plane, for dynamic monitoring and data aggregation.

   *  The resource plane, in support of the different nature of the
      interactions at the Quantum Forwarding Stratum, like the case of
      entanglement persistence beyond direct physical reachability.

4.2.1.  The Role of Service Units

   The fact we remarked above about the QKD service unit being a shared
   state between two application entities supports a direct translation
   of the concept to apply it in a generalized quantum network.  A
   service unit in this context will correspond to the shared quantum
   states to be consume by the application entities, according to the
   goals of their sharing of these quantum states.  This implies that a
   QKD service unit can be considered a specialized quantum service
   unit, where the shared state has been somehow pre-processed to
   distill the bits that define the shared key.  A similar pattern could
   be applicable to other specialized quantum network applications, as
   it would be the case of distributed quantum sensing or metrology.

   The identification of such service units can follow the same patterns
   described for the QKD service units, with three URNs, two of them
   identifying the pair of application entities sharing the state, and a
   third one defining the lifecycle parameters.  Obviously, these
   parameters should differ from the ones postulated for QKD, and it is
   possible to envisage parameters such as shared state size (the number
   of entangled pairs), a timestamp regarding lifetime of the shared
   state, and others addressing aspects like fidelity.  As the quantum
   memory technology at the foundation of these shared states evolve, a
   clearer view of the parameter URN will become available.  Experiments
   on this issue will be really useful to identify these parameters and
   shape the q-component of the parameter URN.

   The content of a QKD service unit is a bitstring corresponding to the
   shared key.  These bitstring is stored in the memories of the
   corresponding KMEs, with individual bits differentiated by their
   position in the string.  Quantum memories must be available at the
   resource plane of the Service Stratum (SS), and the service unit
   should contain the addresses used by those quantum memories to
   identify the corresponding entangled pairs.  The elements equivalent
   to the KMEs in the control plane of the SS interact with these
   quantum memories to identify the applicable addresses, and to require
   the elements in the control plane of the Quantum Forwarding Stratum
   (QFS) to activate the corresponding exchanges in the quantum links
   they operate.  Each of the endpoints of these quantum links is
   expected to provide a functionality equivalent to the agents
   discussed for QKD networks, in support of the SS quantum memories.

   As discussed in the case of QKD service units, directionality (the
   specification of an origin and a destination) is not applicable in
   this case either, as service units correspond to a shared state.
   What can be certainly considered is an originator of this shared
   state, corresponding to the application element requesting the
   establishment of the service unit.  This would trigger the SS control
   plane element attached to the application to start its route decision
   procedures and to start the interactions with the relevant SS control
   planes to start the necessary exchanges to establish the shared
   quantum states.  The nature of the endpoint identifiers support, as
   discussed for shared keys in QKD, the use of any routing mechanisms,
   ranging from strictly hierarchical and centralized schemas based on
   orchestration mechanisms to fully distributed routing algorithms.

   As a result of the routing procedures and the interaction among SS
   control plane elements, there should be corresponding interactions
   with elements in the control planes of the Connectivity Strata (CS)
   and the QFS, to verify and require, as needed, the establishment of
   the individual entangled pairs and, as required, the physical links
   to support them.  There is a consolidated corpus of interfaces
   (usually known as North-Bound Interfaces, NBI) for the control of
   classical connectivity, and specially of optical links, such as the
   TAPI specification [TAPI240], and different proposals to select and
   establish paths.  It seems necessary to explore and experiment with
   similar interfaces and procedures for the management and control of
   quantum links, addressing the challenges already identified in
   [RFC9340] and exploring the implications of quantum-native routing
   proposals as made in [QUADDR].  A specially significant question is
   the mapping between the entangled pairs, as identified by the service
   unit, and the payloads exchanged within the QFS.

   Finally, a word on the telemetry planes in each of the proposed
   strata.  It should be obvious the elements in the control planes at
   each of the strata should start monitoring mechanisms at the involved
   elements in the resource planes and activate telemetry collection
   mechanisms.  This brings the requirement of defining and
   experimenting with appropriate metrics and telemetry data models for
   both the SS and the QFS, as already being defined for QKD
   infrastructures [ETSI23].

4.2.2.  The Role of Synthetic Environments

   Due to the early stage of many, if not all, quantum technologies,
   experimenting with quantum devices and equipment can be seriously
   hindered by high costs and limited availability.  This challenge is
   particularly evident for experimentation at the scale required to
   validate network protocols and inter- and intra-strata interfaces.
   In this context, synthetic environments, and synthetic testbeds
   enabled by these environments, become an essential tool.  They enable
   the emulation of quantum network deployments in a fully controlled
   setting, allowing the execution of experiments and trials, protocol
   evaluations, and even security analyses, where potential network
   attacks can be tested without compromising the integrity of an
   already built quantum network or a significant number of physical
   devices.

   Based on the results introduced in [QKNDT24] for QKD networks, the
   concept of a Quantum Network Digital Twin (QNDT) provides a
   foundation for such environments.  QNDTs will enable a better
   understanding of the properties of the different network elements,
   interfaces, and protocols, and the applicability of the architecture
   proposed in this document.  It is important to note that a QNDT is
   not a simulation tool, even though some of its components may apply
   simulation functionality to adapt their behavior to that of a quantum
   element.  Rather, a QNDT represents a distributed classical system
   that mirrors the operational behavior of a quantum network,
   responding in real time and accurately reproducing the dynamics and
   interactions of quantum entities.

   In the case of QKD network deployments, significant progress has been
   achieved thanks to both practical deployments, as exemplified in
   [EUROQCI] and the early coordinated efforts of standardization
   bodies.  These advances include the definition of standardized APIs
   that specify the communication means between quantum nodes and
   customer applications, like [ETSI04], and the integration of network
   management mechanisms widely adopted in classical communication
   systems, like the SDN approach defined in [ETSI15].  This coordinated
   efforts have translated into more flexible, programmable, and
   scalable control of quantum resources, facilitating seamless
   interoperability between quantum and classical infrastructures.
   Despite these advances, several aspects of QKD networking remain
   under active development.  These include the definition of interfaces
   that ensure interoperability across different administrative domains,
   as well as the design and validation of architectures capable of
   supporting large-scale deployments, that is, networks comprising
   hundreds of interconnected nodes.  In this regard, platforms such as
   the one described in [QUDITTO] offer a valuable opportunity, as they
   enable the emulation of low-level quantum network behaviors using
   classical computational resources.  Such synthetic environments
   provide the means to model and analyze complex network scenarios that
   are currently unattainable in fully physical experimental testbeds.

   When considering general-purpose quantum networks, particularly those
   based on entanglement distribution and management, the role of
   synthetic environments becomes even more significant.  Unlike QKD
   networks, whose architectural and operational principles are
   relatively well understood, entanglement-based networks are still in
   an early stage of development.  Many fundamental networking aspects,
   such as entanglement routing, resource scheduling, and inter-layer
   coordination, remain open research questions, with a crucial lack of
   practical validation.  In this context, QNDTs offer a unique
   opportunity to accelerate progress: by enabling controlled emulation
   of quantum states, interactions, and network behaviors, they allow to
   test novel architectures, evaluate protocol performance, and explore
   scalability under realistic yet fully reproducible conditions.

   However, the development of a general-purpose QNDT introduces its own
   set of challenges.  Such a system must not only emulate the
   functional behavior of quantum components but also ensure that the
   underlying classical infrastructure responds within the same temporal
   and operational constraints as its quantum counterpart, thereby
   enabling accurate validation of protocols and network strategies.
   Moreover, unlike QKD networks where standardized interfaces and APIs
   have already been established (or are at least emerging), no
   equivalent standards currently exist for general quantum networks.
   Consequently, a QNDT must be designed to be inherently flexible and
   extensible, capable of accommodating evolving definitions of
   interfaces, communication protocols, and architectural abstractions.
   In this regard, the QNDT once again becomes a key enabler for the
   development, integration, and testing of these foundational elements.

   Building upon the above discussion, two primary challenges must be
   addressed as prerequisites for constructing a fully functional QNDT.
   First, it is necessary to develop a mechanism capable of handling the
   quantum-specific aspects of the system, executing simulations and
   distributing results across nodes, resulting in the emulation of the
   quantum behavior of network elements within the underlying classical
   infrastructure.  Second, there must be a definition of a minimal set
   of core primitives or instructions that serves as the foundation for
   constructing more advanced mechanisms, such as standardized
   interfaces and communication methods between network elements and
   external systems.  Together, these two pillars will establish the
   groundwork for a QNDT framework capable of evolving in parallel with
   the broader quantum networking ecosystem.

   The core quantum emulation mechanism for such an environment,
   according to the current state of the art, would be the QNDT
   emulation engine, based on a centralized simulation component
   designed to execute the simulations needed to emulate the quantum
   behavior of all network elements.  This engine may rely on quantum
   network simulators such as [NetSquid], [SeQUeNCe], or [QuNetSim].
   However, these platforms alone do not fulfill the requirements of a
   QNDT, since, as discussed above, a QNDT is not a simulation of the
   network but a distributed classical system that replicates the
   behavior of a real quantum network.  Therefore, the central
   simulation element must be complemented by a result distribution
   mechanism, for example, through a publish/subscribe (Pub/Sub)
   protocol.  In such a setup, network elements subscribe to topics
   relevant to their operation and can communicate with the central
   simulation tool both to request simulations and receive results
   through asynchronous interactions.

   Another essential aspect concerns the handling of temporal
   consistency between the “simulation time”, i.e., the time required to
   execute a simulation, and the “simulated time,” i.e., the time the
   simulation calculates the real system would take to perform the same
   operation.  Since simulation time is generally shorter than simulated
   time, the QNDT must incorporate logic ensuring that results are
   delivered only after the appropriate simulated delay has elapsed.
   This guarantees that the QNDT responds within the same temporal
   boundaries as its physical counterpart, thereby preserving the
   fidelity and realism of the emulated network behavior.

   In addition, to maintain state realism within the QNDT, it is crucial
   to take into account the natural decoherence and noise dynamics of
   quantum states over time.  For instance, when entangled pairs are
   distributed between two nodes and stored for a period before being
   used in subsequent operations, the QNDT must emulate the gradual
   evolution and degradation of these states.  This entails tracking the
   elapsed time between state creation and use, and updating the state
   accordingly before executing the next instruction.

5.  Security Considerations

   The general considerations made in [RFC8597] apply, as well as an
   elaboration on the following points regarding:

   *  The requirements on mutual authentication in the channels used for
      quantum interactions, as they should require methods rooted at
      physical properties.

   *  Specific physical attacks related to the particular quantum
      mechanisms in use by the quantum forwarding stratum.

   *  The interaction of these physical attacks with classical attacks
      to the control and monitoring activities, possibly translating
      into a threat surface augmentation.

   Furthermore, as the identification of interfaces and protocols
   progresses other considerations will be required.  In particular, the
   security considerations included in the documents referenced for the
   Connectivity Stratum, [RFC8453] and [RFC8637] apply to the proposed
   framework.

6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8141]  Saint-Andre, P. and J. Klensin, "Uniform Resource Names
              (URNs)", RFC 8141, DOI 10.17487/RFC8141, April 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8141>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8597]  Contreras, LM., Bernardos, CJ., Lopez, D., Boucadair, M.,
              and P. Iovanna, "Cooperating Layered Architecture for
              Software-Defined Networking (CLAS)", RFC 8597,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8597, May 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8597>.

6.2.  Informative References

   [ALTOQ24]  Muniz, A., Canto, R., Contreras, L., Pastor, A., Lopez,
              D., and J. Morales, "Using Protocol to Address SD-QKD
              Federation in Multi-Domain Scenarios", July 2024,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10628176>.

   [CLASEVO]  Contreras, L. M., Boucadair, M., Lopez, D., and C. J.
              Bernardos, "An Evolution of Cooperating Layered
              Architecture for SDN (CLAS) for Compute and Data
              Awareness", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              contreras-coinrg-clas-evolution-03, 5 July 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-contreras-
              coinrg-clas-evolution-03>.

   [ETSI04]   "ETSI GS QKD 004: Quantum Key Distribution (QKD);
              Application Interface", August 2020,
              <https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/
              QKD/001_099/004/02.01.01_60/gs_QKD004v020101p.pdf>.

   [ETSI14]   "ETSI GS QKD 014: Quantum Key Distribution (QKD); Protocol
              and data format of REST-based key delivery API", February
              2019, <https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/
              QKD/001_099/014/01.01.01_60/gs_qkd014v010101p.pdf>.

   [ETSI15]   "ETSI GS QKD 015: Quantum Key Distribution (QKD); Control
              Interface for Software Defined Networks", April 2022,
              <https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/
              QKD/001_099/015/02.01.01_60/gs_QKD015v020101p.pdf>.

   [ETSI18]   "ETSI GS QKD 018: Quantum Key Distribution (QKD);
              Orchestration Interface for Software Defined Networks",
              April 2022, <https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/
              QKD/001_099/018/01.01.01_60/gs_QKD018v010101p.pdf>.

   [ETSI23]   "ETSI Work-Item QKD 023: Quantum Key Distribution (QKD);
              Monitoring Interface and Data Model", n.d.,
              <https://portal.etsi.org/webapp/WorkProgram/
              Report_WorkItem.asp?WKI_ID=69537>.

   [EUROQCI]  "The European Quantum Communication Infrastructure
              (EuroQCI) Initiative", September 2023, <https://digital-
              strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/european-quantum-
              communication-infrastructure-euroqci>.

   [EVCK25]   Lopez, B., Vidal, I., Valera, F., and D. Lopez, "An
              Enhanced Virtualized Control and Key Management Model for
              QKD Networks", January 2025,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10870375>.

   [MADQCI23] Martin, V., Brito, J. P., Ortíz, L., Brito-Méndez, R.,
              Vicente, R., Saez-Buruaga, J., Sebastian, A. J., Aguado,
              D. G., García-Cid, M. I., Setien, J., Salas, P.,
              Escribano, C., Dopazo, E., Rivas-Moscoso, J., Pastor-
              Perales, A., and D. Lopez, "The Madrid Testbed: QKD SDN
              Control and Key Management in a Production Network", July
              2023, <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10207295>.

   [NetSquid] Coopmans, T., Knegjens, R., Dahlberg, A., Maier, D.,
              Nijsten, L., Filho, J. de O., and et. al., "NetSquid, a
              NETwork Simulator for QUantum Information using Discrete
              events", July 2021,
              <https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-021-00647-8>.

   [NFV06]    "ETSI GS NFV 006: Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV)
              Release 4; Management and Orchestration; Architectural
              Framework Specification", December 2022,
              <https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/
              NFV/001_099/006/04.04.01_60/gs_NFV006v040401p.pdf>.

   [PSQN22]   DiAdamo, S., Qi, B., Miller, G., Kompella, R., and A.
              Shabani, "Packet switching in quantum networks: A path to
              the quantum Internet", October 2022,
              <https://journals.aps.org/prresearch/abstract/10.1103/
              PhysRevResearch.4.043064>.

   [QIPS22]   Illiano, J., Caleffia, M., Manzalini, A., and A. S.
              Cacciapuoti, "Quantum Internet Protocol Stack: a
              Comprehensive Survey", August 2022,
              <https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/
              S1389128622002250>.

   [QIROAD18] Wehner, S., Elkouss, D., and R. Hanson, "Quantum internet:
              A vision for the road ahead", October 2018,
              <https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aam9288>.

   [QKNDT24]  Martin, R., Lopez, B., Vidal, I., Valera, F., and B.
              Nogales, "Service for Deploying Digital Twins of QKD
              Networks", January 2024,
              <https://doi.org/10.3390/app14031018>.

   [QNSA24]   Lopez, B., Vidal, I., Valera, F., Lopez, D., and A.
              Pastor, "Unleashing Flexibility and Interoperability in
              QKD Networks: The Power of Softwarized Architectures",
              July 2024,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10628345>.

   [QREPS]    "Quantum repeaters: From quantum networks to the quantum
              internet", December 2023,
              <https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.95.045006>.

   [QTTI21]   Martin, V., Brito, J. P., Escribano, C., Menchetti, M.,
              White, C., Lord, A., Wissel, F., Gunkel, M., Gavignet, P.,
              Genay, N., Moult, O. L., Abellan, C., Manzalini, A.,
              Pastor-Perales, A., Lopez, V., and D. Lopez, "Quantum
              Technologies in the Telecommunications Industry", July
              2021, <https://epjquantumtechnology.springeropen.com/
              articles/10.1140/epjqt/s40507-021-00108-9>.

   [QUADDR]   Caleffi, M. and A. S. Cacciapuoti, "Quantum Internet
              Architecture: unlocking Quantum-Native Routing via Quantum
              Addressing", July 2025,
              <https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.19655>.

   [QUDITTO]  "Quditto, a tool that allows deploying digital twins of
              QKD networks over classical infrastructure", April 2025,
              <https://quditto.io/>.

   [QuNetSim] Diadamo, S., Nötzel, J., Zanger, B., and M. M. Beşe,
              "QuNetSim: A Software Framework for Quantum Networks",
              June 2021, <https://doi.org/10.1109/TQE.2021.3092395>.

   [RFC8453]  Ceccarelli, D., Ed. and Y. Lee, Ed., "Framework for
              Abstraction and Control of TE Networks (ACTN)", RFC 8453,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8453, August 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8453>.

   [RFC8637]  Dhody, D., Lee, Y., and D. Ceccarelli, "Applicability of
              the Path Computation Element (PCE) to the Abstraction and
              Control of TE Networks (ACTN)", RFC 8637,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8637, July 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8637>.

   [RFC9340]  Kozlowski, W., Wehner, S., Van Meter, R., Rijsman, B.,
              Cacciapuoti, A. S., Caleffi, M., and S. Nagayama,
              "Architectural Principles for a Quantum Internet",
              RFC 9340, DOI 10.17487/RFC9340, March 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9340>.

   [RFC9583]  Wang, C., Rahman, A., Li, R., Aelmans, M., and K.
              Chakraborty, "Application Scenarios for the Quantum
              Internet", RFC 9583, DOI 10.17487/RFC9583, June 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9583>.

   [SeQUeNCe] Wu, X., Kolar, A., Chung, J., Jin, D., Zhong, T.,
              Kettimuthu, R., and M. Suchara, "SeQUeNCe: A Customizable
              Discrete-Event Simulator of Quantum Networks", September
              2020, <https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-9565/ac22f6>.

   [TAPI240]  "ONF Transport API SDK 2.4.0", n.d., <https://github.com/
              Open-Network-Models-and-Interfaces-ONMI/TAPI/releases/tag/
              v2.4.0>.

   [Y3802]    "ITU-T Recommendation Y.3802: Quantum key distribution
              networks. Functional architecture", April 2021,
              <https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-Y.3802>.

Acknowledgments

   This document is based on work partially funded by the EU Horizon
   Europe project QSNP (grant 101114043), the Spanish UNICO project
   OPENSEC (grant TSI-063000-2021-60), and the MadridQuantum–CM project
   (funded by the EU, NextGenerationEU, grant PRTR-C17.I1, and by the
   Comunidad de Madrid, Programa de Acciones Complementarias).

Authors' Addresses

   Diego Lopez
   Telefonica
   Email: diego.r.lopez@telefonica.com


   Vicente Martin
   UPM
   Email: vicente.martin@upm.es


   Blanca Lopez
   IMDEA Networks
   Email: blanca.lopez@imdea.org


   Luis M. Contreras
   Telefonica
   Email: luismiguel.contrerasmurillo@telefonica.com
